# nf-core/pairgenomealign: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [Alignments](#alignments) - Alignment of the _query_ genomes to the _target_ genome
- [Dot plots](#dot-plots) - Visualisation of the alignment of the _query_ genomes to the _target_ genome
- [`N` regions](#n-regions) - Coordinate of the `N` regions on the _query_ and _target_ genomes
- [MultiQC](#multiqc) - Aggregate report describing results and QC from the whole pipeline
- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution

Each _query_ genome, is aligned to the _target_ genome, and each alignment is visualised with dot plots. The output file names are constructed by concatenating the _target_ and _query_ sample identifiers with a `___` separator (three underscores), to faciliate re-extraction of the IDs from file names.

### Alignments

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `alignment/`
  - `*.train` is the alignment parameters computed by `last-train` (optional)
  - `*.m2m_aln.maf.gz` is the _**many-to-many**_ alignment between _target_ and _query_ genomes. (optional through the `--m2m` option)
  - `*.m2o_aln.maf.gz` is the _**many-to-one**_ alignment regions of the _target_ genome are matched at most once by the _query_ genome.
  - `*.o2o_aln.maf.gz` is the _**one-to-one**_ alignment between the _target_ and _query_ genomes.
  - `*.o2m_aln.maf.gz` is the _**one-to-many**_ alignment between the _target_ and _query_ genomes (optional).

</details>

Genomes are aligned witn [`lastal`](https://gitlab.com/mcfrith/last/-/blob/main/doc/lastal.rst) after alignment parameters have been determined with [`last-train`](https://gitlab.com/mcfrith/last/-/blob/main/doc/last-train.rst). _**Many-to-many**_ alignments are progressively converted to _**one-to-one**_ with [`last-split`](https://gitlab.com/mcfrith/last/-/blob/main/doc/last-split.rst).

### Dot plots

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `alignment/`
  - `*.m2m_plot` (optional)
  - `*.m2o_plot` (optional)
  - `*.o2o_plot` (optional)
  - `*.o2m_plot` (optional)

</details>

Dot plots representing the pairwise genome alignments, produced with the [`last-dotplot`](https://gitlab.com/mcfrith/last/-/blob/main/doc/last-dotplot.rst) tool.

### `N` regions

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `cutn/`
  - `targetGenome.bed`
  - `<sample>.bed`

</details>

The poly-N regions longer than 9 bases in each genome sequence often indicate contig boundaries in scaffolds. Therefore, we marked them in pale red in the dot-plots. They are detected with the`seqtk cutN` command and its output (in 3-column BED format) is provided in the `cutn` directory. Sample IDs are constructed to generate file names, except for the _target_ genome which is always called `targetGenome` to avoid filename collisions.

### MultiQC

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `multiqc/`
  - `multiqc_report.html`: a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser.
  - `multiqc_data/`: directory containing parsed statistics from the different tools used in the pipeline.
  - `multiqc_plots/`: directory containing static images from the report in various formats.

</details>

[MultiQC](http://multiqc.info) is a visualization tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available in the report data directory.

Results generated by MultiQC collate pipeline QC from supported tools e.g. FastQC. The pipeline has special steps which also allow the software versions to be reported in the MultiQC output for future traceability. For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see <http://multiqc.info>.

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.
  - Parameters used by the pipeline run: `params.json`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.
